So probably doesn't matter too much, so OK.
Thank you, Robert.
You just started the recording.
I appreciate that I had forgotten to do so.
I'm off my schedule.
It's way it goes, so let me before I get started with the class time.
I do want to just talk to you all about this.
Umm.
I teach solo 6 classes, 3 ethics classes, and three copyright classes for each class.
I judge participation both by reviewing the meeting chat, because most people tend to, you know, it's one of the benefits to doing this.
But with this format is you all can talk all you want.
Ask questions in the meeting chat and that's how most class participation handles.
But then I also do the blackboard discussion questions.
And I do ask that you all do respond to these.
I do read all of them every once in a while, I'll respond when someone raises a point that I think needs some response, or when someone like tries, you know, ask me a question on them.
But I do encourage you all to put your thoughts there.
They basically act as little like participation quizzes to make certain that you all were paying a modicum of attention.
I don't have high expectations.
It's a. It's a.
It's a I forget what it's called, but it's a it's a.
It's a remote class at the you know it's a live remote class, so I know how these things go, but this is this is the way that I track participation.
The other thing is is we do do an ethics directed grade.
In the past I had done an ethics paper, but I had a couple semesters ago I switched that to an ethics essay test.
UM.
So unless and, that's been working pretty well, it's it's a little less work on you all and it's still, I mean it's it's an essay test on Blackboard.
You have, I think I assigned it and you have a week to do it or something like that.
That'll be after my last ethics class.
So unless I hear from a decent number of you that you would really like to do in ethics paper instead, I'm just gonna keep doing that.
The one benefit to the ethics paper is you do get a pick your own topic, whereas with the it's a test.
I've just got a, you know, a genericized fact pattern that I asked you to write an essay about.
It's it's kind of, it's like a law school test.
Only way less intense.
Umm, so do keep that in mind and if like is it if some of you all would actually like to write a paper, let me know.
Believe it or not, I always have a few people that would prefer that option, so I'm open to it, but it's gonna be one thing for everybody.
I can't be doing, you know, different, different ethics grades for everybody.
And it is a substantial part of your grade.
I'm not exactly a difficult grader.
Migrating scale is as long as you answer the question with like you know, a modicum of effort.
You're probably gonna get B if you don't answer questions I take off.
If you do answer questions, you know if you answer questions thoroughly, you get bumped up, and then if you're really like if you're really doing a good job, you know if you're wrapping in things we discussed in class.
If you're wrapping in external sources, if you're making really good points, I could tell you're really thinking about it.
That's how you get an A on the ethics ethics test or the ethics paper, depending on how we do it.
So but if you have any any questions about the scale, the grading criteria when we get closer to the test, I'll be happy to answer those.
So all of that stuff aside, let me pull up the slides and start presenting on these.
There it is.
So that should be.
Should be working now you all see in the slides.
Umm, OK.
This is gonna be a problem.
Sorry folks.
My it's just a just a add on my.
Second Monitor isn't working right now, so I'm having to figure out how to be able to see the.
See the slides and you're all chatting at the same time.
Uh may not be able to let me just have to back and forth a bunch.
That's fine.
I can deal with it.
I'd appreciate confirming that.
Alright, so let's get this started.
All right, so here we go.
Ethics.
Ethics is awesome.
Oh, this is the wrong slide.
Sorry folks.
Again, I'm a little little little out of sorts.
Today I clicked on the wrong slide.
There we go.
Now I've got the right one.
There we go.
Introduction to ethics.
Yes, yes.
OK.
Alright, introduction to ethics.
Question #1 cause philosophy class.
At this point, folks, so we ask a lot of questions in here.
So what is ethics and what isn't ethics?
What are your all thoughts on that?
Feel free to chat.
It into the chat.
I will tell you they are very few wrong answers and there are a whole lot of right answers to these sorts of questions.
So Austin says study of morality.
That is a correct answer, Sean doing the right thing when no one is looking at.
It's more integrity, morals and principle that is a correct answer.
Her Phillip a code of moral principles.
That's good framework.
Joey Framework study of how to make moral choices ohm that is a very good answer as is Nicholas's there.
Ethics is conduct.
Morality is metaphysical.
Moral I Ben.
I like that answer a moral Rubik to Drudge Judge actions by those are all those are all very good answers.
No one in there had a wrong answer.
So yeah, those are all things.
All of that is ethics, so the second question is, is what isn't ethics Jacob?
That's a relativistic and good point.
Uh, Richard, you said there think there's a distinction between morality and ethics.
All actually get into that in just a minute.
There is, but there also isn't, because again, philosophy.
And who's says ethics is not ones personal belief.
Umm yes, but also no umm, because individual ethics is a thing.
At so Philip, you are correct.
Ethics potentially are not objective.
There is such a thing as subjective ethics, and whether that's a strength or a weakness, you know, kind of depends on your viewpoint and what you're using them for.
I tend to view it as a weakness, so that is actually one of the criticisms of one of the major forms of ethics.
We'll talk about.
It's always tougher to answer negative, but you all did a good attempt at it.
One of the things I like to emphasize is ethics is not necessarily law.
Ethics isn't necessarily.
Morality.
Someone mentioned that Richard you were mentioning that there's a distinction between morality and ethics.
A lot of these things are interrelated, but not necessarily the same.
So when we just talk about ethics in this class, we are using the basically the Internet and cyclopedia of philosophy definition which is systemizing defending and recommending concepts of right and wrong behavior behavior in this case is both actions and decisions.
But you see the Merriam-webster simple definition, you know, there you go.
The there are but interesting thing here is there's three major categories of ethics, you know, and the first major category which we are not going to cover in class very much is called metaethics.
And that is where you're getting into like the fundamental questions of morality.
What is good?
What is evil?
You know, is there such a thing as intrinsic good and intrinsic evil?
Are they merely extrinsic factors?
You know, so yes, ethics is morality, but for us, no, ethics is not morality.
And we do that mostly because that sort of stuff is really hard to talk about, right?
That's the sort of thing where either you're talking about people's like, closely held religious beliefs and you gotta be very careful about those sorts of conversations or you're just you're engaging in the sorts of discussions that involve, like reams of really dense paper, right.
And it's the sort of thing where those are the good conversations to have over a, you know, over a beer with your buddy sitting on the back porch, you're looking at the moon rise, you know?
But they're not necessarily good conversations to have in a classroom setting, especially not a classroom setting where we've got three classes for this.
Yeah, Sean, it gets into spiritual stuff pretty quickly.
It also gets into the stuff that's not really scientific.
Umm.
And none of this is science.
This is philosophy, OK?
Umm, but it gets into the sorts of things where you can't really talk about it in an objective sort of manner.
You can try a lot of people really try, but it's really hard to have, you know, like objective, real-world discussions about metaethics.
It's it's too big.
It's too fundamental.
There is a value in having those conversations, but not in this class.
What we do talk about, though, a lot is going to be normative ethics and applied ethics, normative ethics, you know, like like the slide says.
Are are your practical guides?
These are the ethical systems that try to help people make ethical decisions in their actual lives.
UM, these ones we talked about because there are a lot more grounded.
You know you can look at A normative ethical system and you can give objective feedback about strengths and weaknesses and practicality and applicability.
And and you can have those sorts of discussions and we will about the three systems that we dive into.
The other one is applied ethics and applied ethics is probably the the most relevant ethics on a day to day basis because it's applied it's ethics normative, ethical theories taken and applied to a specific field, environmental ethics, legal ethics, medical ethics, or in you're all case the ACM Code of Ethics as applied to computer engineers and computer scientists.
So again it's it's it's grounded, it's real world, it's applicable.
You can have really good conversations about value and worth, and you know, is this a valuable system of ethics?
Is it worth trying to implement or is it not worth the effort?
Are there better alternatives out there?
You try having those questions about meta ethics and people start throwing fists, which is a thing I usually like to try and avoid my classes emphasis on usually.
And so we really will be focusing on normative ethics and applied ethics.
Not so much on metaethics.
Umm my goal from these three classes that we have is I just want you all to be able to work ethical analysis into your classroom discussions.
You know, I want the ethics test to show that you have all really thought about it and you know on a high falutin goal, I would like for you all to have the resources to maybe dive into ethics.
You know, post this class in your in your lives if you haven't already.
Quick question, how many of you have studied ethics in the past of any sort?
OK, we've got a handful of people.
Umm philosophy class Phillip my undergrad was in philosophy that absolutely counts.
That's the best sort of ethics.
Dang it.
Yeah, I mean that.
And Alex, you've had conversations on it, but nothing real formal.
That's fine.
One of the points that I like to make is that most ethical education in the modern world is not formal.
Most of it is.
You get it from just the world.
This is especially the case with virtue ethics.
When we talk about it, Jacob not really, no common in absolutely honest answer, Nicholas, you actually read nicomachean ethics.
I have too, but did you do it as part of a class?
Was it just for songs?
Really interested in your answer here.
So I want to know.
I love it.
Ohm saying you didn't have a specifics ethics class?
Yeah.
I mean it's, you know, pre modern era ethics like formalized ethical education was a was a foundational part of a, A, an adult education like people who got educated would have formal education in ethics.
Umm, it's really it's.
We live in a hyper specialized society these days, so a lot of people they don't really ever get even in higher education.
They don't ever really get this sort of like formal education.
They hear about it.
Maybe they read about it, maybe they get it through alternative methods, but they don't study ethics.
And I again bias here.
Philosophy did a lot of ethics.
My my my senior thesis was on the ethics of capitalism.
OK, leadership training is where a lot of people get ethics these days.
It's the major cases major places where people get ethical training will be either on the job.
Umm well, they're get ethical training in applied ethics as applied to their job in some sort of leadership training or through whatever their religion is.
Those are the major ways people get ethical educations in the modern world.
Ohm.
Anyway, can we please discuss the ethics of capitalism?
I'm happy to have a side conversation about that.
Uh.
Modern capitalism does not ethically bear much of resemblance to capitalism as envisioned by Adam Smith when he wrote the wealth of nations.
I'm just gonna leave it at that for now, but this is a this is an area that I'm very happy to talk about, you know, on the side.
So anyway, so that's my goal.
I want you all to form a habit of thinking ethically.
So going back to the original question, what is an ethics here?
Something I always want to emphasize is just because something is ethical doesn't mean it's legal and vice versa.
Something can be perfectly legal and absolutely unethical.
In fact, it's not even all that uncommon.
Umm, you know, that's that's a thing, folks.
In fact, you can even make an argument that certain elements of the legal code are on their face.
Kind of unethical.
You see, this oftentimes made in the tax code one way or the other.
Both sides of the aisle are have been known to make that exact same argument.
Umm, but it is important to remember that just because something is legal doesn't mean it's ethical.
Slavery was legal.
It was never ethical and I stand by that.
You know, civil disobedience was illegal, but it was very ethical.
You know you cannot equate ethics and legality.
They are oftentimes related, but they are not the same thing and you always have to remember that.
Umm, I also want us again to be careful about not confusing ethics with morality.
You know you you can very ethically make very bad choices, right?
You can very ethically make the very wrong choice and one of the ethical systems we'll talk about is one of the things you have to watch out for is that exact scenario, consequentialist ethics.
It is very easy to make a decision.
I wouldn't say very easy, but it's very possible to make a decision that is perfectly ethical under consequential is ethics and is an absolutely horrendous decision.
It's a it's a common science fiction trope.
So you got we do try to remember that just because something is ethical doesn't necessarily mean it's moral.
Remember, ethics for us is the study of making decisions that are, you know, right and wrong decisions.
And you can make a right decision under a code of ethics, and it'd be a very, very bad decision.
So what are the three major frameworks of ethics?
So I've already referred to two of them, but the first one we're gonna talk about is virtue ethics.
When we talk about virtue ethics in the next class, we're going to take a deeper look at Nicomachean ethics, Aristotle's systems of ethics.
Mostly because even though Aristotle was a, he was not the best of people.
He was a racist, classist, sexist.
There was at least another one, but the dude literally did not think that poor people could be fully ethic.
He did not think that women could be fully ethical.
He did not think that anyone who was non Greek could be fully ethical, but that's a product of his time and you have to remember that we have to view it through that the system of ethics that he made.
It was pretty amazing and it's because he took a really systemic view of what constitutes ethics.
So we're gonna use him as the example.
Umm, but virtue ethics and emphasizes adopting an ethical character as as proposed by the virtue ethicist which already tells you that this one tends to be very.
Very subjective and you gotta be careful about that because you know what was ethical for a Roman citizen, you know, during the time of the Stoics may not necessarily be what is ethical for, you know, a desk jockey in Louisville, KY in 2024.
24 and that's OK, right?
Because you gotta.
You gotta look at it.
You can look at the past through the lens of the present, and that's a valuable and good thing to do.
But you also have to look at the paths through the lens of the past and through what is there umm?
That being said, virtue ethics is one of the oldest ethical theories.
You know, classical Greek and Roman ethics is almost all virtual ethics, so it scism Epicureanism, Aristotles, nicomachean ethics, Plato's ethics, where virtue ethics.
You also see it in a lot of the early Christian philosophers.
Aquinas was basically rewrote nicomachean ethics and it's something theological Augustin was very platonic and his approach to ethics.
Umm, you also see it?
It's very widespread.
Confucian ethics is very virtue ethics oriented.
Daoist ethics very virtue ethics oriented, you know, it's how well do you embody the Dow, but there are also like specific virtues that are espoused in the dowdy Cheng and in the etching.
Humility, flexibility, perseverance is a big one.
Buddhist ethics is absolutely a virtue ethics system.
You know you've got the the eight fold path and the five precepts.
You know, a lot of world real world ethical theory is at it Hindu ethics, which I haven't read as much of, but in the Upanishads the ethics ethical theory espoused there is very much a virtue ethics theory.
Really looking at the the foundational ethics, it's virtue ethics, and it's super widespread. Hi.
So I'm gonna.
I'm gonna lay some virtues on you, and I want to see if you all can identify them.
Hold on a second.
I always have to look this up to make certain I've got it right.
So I want to start off with first.
Does anyone recognize the trifecta of ethics that goes by courage, wisdom, and power?
Yeah, that's the Triforce.
Umm.
What about?
What about courage, ambition, loyalty and intelligence?
And recognize that Harry Potter, Harry Potter added.
Its core is a virtue play.
Quite apart from everything that was done wrong in that, at its core, it's a virtue play.
I really don't like what she did with Slytherins.
Ambition is not, in and of itself, bad.
I don't think, but that's looking into metaethics here.
Here's one that I always like bringing up.
Honesty, kindness, laughter, generosity, loyalty, and friendship.
Does anyone recognize those?
Very close, Austin.
Not quite though.
Yeah, and it is absolutely.
My little ponies.
Yep, I for my daughter's birthday, she does.
Turned 12 and for her birthday we sat down and marathoned my little ponies cause I watched so much my little ponies when she was younger.
And I gotta tell you folks, like, unironically, some of the best kids entertainment out there, but it's all about virtue ethics, right?
All of the ponies represent a little virtue.
And then when you put them all together, it makes magic.
Which sounds really silly, but that's how a lot of the virtue ethics education in the world happens.
You pick it up through that sort of mass media, which is part of why looking at virtue ethics is so important, because you need to know what you're being taught.
You always want to look at, you know, if you're trying to think ethically, you always want to look at what are.
What is this media?
What is this embodying?
You know what virtues are we seeing espoused by this media as something that is worth, umm, worth at worth advocating worth embodying, right?
It's part of why my favorite Avenger is and always will be Captain America.
You know the dude was a virtue ethics paragon paragon in this setting, and he was opposed.
But friends with Tony Stark, who was very much a consequentialist ethics so cool when you start thinking about it?
Umm, there is some modern traction with virtue ethics.
I don't want you to think it's just all old.
Alistair McIntyre has done a lot of writing about it.
The ethics of care is one of the ethical systems that I have a lot of respect for, and it's virtue ethics and core.
But end of the day, virtue ethics is the old one.
It's the widespread one, and it's the one that is most common.
I feel in the day to day world.
Next one, we're going to talk about is deontological ethics.
And when we talk about this in more detail, we're gonna look at Emmanuel counts.
Umm, his categorical imperatives and what count does is he tried to create some deontological guidelines, rules that were applicable across the whole of human spectrum.
He didn't succeed.
You have to admire his effort, but if any of you have ever read CONT, I feel your pain.
Umm.
That being said, what deontological ethics is is it's duty or rule based ethical theories.
It tries to propose certain rules and as long as you follow those rules, you are acting ethically.
It also includes write space theories where write space theories are the opposite side of the coin.
You know, rights based theories are as long as you are acting within these rights and not pass them, you are acting ethically.
So it's it's a little more open ended, but it's the same basic concept.
You have certain parameters around your behavior that are.
You are supposed to follow.
Duty based rules based deontological ethics tend to be more common, and you see this most often in both the Legal code reference earlier, though, just because it's legal doesn't mean it's ethical.
But the legal code in a way really is like an attempt to set, you know, certain fundamental groundwork.
Deontological rules of behavior for society.
But you also see it in most professional ethics are deontological in nature.
The American Bar Association Code of Legal Ethics is a book unto itself, and in order to be a lawyer, you have to pass a bar exam that's focused on ethics.
Or at least you did 20 some years ago when I became a lawyer.
So you know, the American Medical Association has a deontological code of ethics.
The ACM Code of Ethics at its core, even though one of the things I like about is, it wraps in all three.
At its core is a deontological code of ethics, the IEEE Code of Ethics is very clearly deontological, so you see a lot of the deontological framework of ethics in just the everyday real world, and it's got some advantages, right?
It's clear it makes sense if you're following the rules, you are acting ethically.
There's a certain sort of, you know, there's a certain virtue in that.
Umm.
And also has some weaknesses.
And again, we'll talk about all of this, Richard.
Yes, the Bill of Rights is a deontological ethical code.
Now it's rights based, not duty based.
It there's certain allusions to duty within it, but that's part of the problem with.
I mean, laws are written by people.
But yeah, it is a right based deontological ethical code that is meant to apply as a fundamental basis for American Society.
It's a societal level ethical code?
Adam asked.
Is Deon deontological ethics.
I hate that word.
Is it more prevalent where people act ethical because they are concerned about the consequences of not acting ethically?
Really.
I'm I don't know if it's more prevalent than in virtue ethics.
It's just the consequences tend to be more clear.
Virtue ethics.
The consequences of not acting ethically either are more self focused and we'll definitely talk about this when we talk about Mickey and ethics.
Umm, you know the the one of the cool things about that Aristotle did there is he started by the end.
What is the goal of ethics?
And it's to live.
It's to achieve you demonia which is, you know, vaguely translated as happiness.
But it's more like happiness with yourself, right?
It's basically the ability to look back on your life and be like alright.
Yeah, I did that.
Good.
Umm.
And less like joy, OK.
But the the goal there was by living in a virtuous life, you avoided, you know, feelings of shame, feelings of guilt.
You especially avoided external shame because a lot of the virtue ethics, a lot of we're virtue ethics arose.
Shame was a very it was a used tool to enforce social compliance, so by acting in ways where you couldn't be shamed, or if you were shamed, you were confident that you did the right thing anyways.
Was super important to people.
That's super prevalent in Stoic philosophy.
You know the stoic, stoic philosophy.
Virtue ethics could basically be summed up as being able to be being able to act acting in such a way that you don't feel shame about yourself.
Umm and deontological ethics, though it tends to be more clear what the consequence is if you, you know, if you, if you're a lawyer, and you don't act in accordance with the ABA Code of Ethics, you can lose your license.
Same with this.
If you're a doctor and you don't act in accordance with the medical code of Ethics, you can use lose your license.
You know, and they or you could have some sort of disciplinary action, you know, things like that.
So I would say Adam, yes, it is and this long winded answer, I'm sorry it is more prevalent where people act ethical because they're concerned about the consequences, but the difference is deontological.
Ethics doesn't care.
Virtue ethics cares about why you're acting ethically.
Deontological ethics doesn't care as long as you're acting ethically.
Good on you if you're only doing it because you don't want consequences.
Don't care.
You're still acting ethically, you know.
So in that way, it's a more objective sense.
It doesn't really matter why you're doing, why you're acting ethically as much as you are following the rules and acting ethically.
Umm.
And then the third system that we talked about is consequentialism. Umm.
To uh quote Samuel Jackson, some person is always gonna go on about ends.
Justify the means.
Censored for year olds, delicate hearing.
But realistically, that's not quite what it means.
That tends to be a popular conception of consequentialist ethics, but that's not quite what it means.
OK, consequentialist ethics at its core is simply you act with an eye towards the consequences of your actions, with an eye towards maximizing benefit and minimizing harm.
There are a bunch of different categories of consequentialist ethics.
There's internally focused, there's externally focused, there's benefit focused, there's harm focused.
Umm, but what?
We'll talk about next time we meet is the utilitarianism or the utilitarianists.
Formulation of consequence ethics we'll mostly use mills formulation.
I tend to mix together, bent them and mill my philosophy.
Professors in college would probably throws things at me for doing so, but this isn't a philosophy course.
This is computer engineering course and for those ones, what you're really what you're really saying is you're trying to do the greatest amount of good for the most people with the least harm.
So you're it's a multifaceted, almost algorithmic analysis where you're trying to maximize good both in amount and breath while minimizing harm.
Now, some consequentialist theories will go so far as to say that the consequences of the action or decision really do determine whether it was ethical or not.
Most of them don't.
Most of them recognize that we are human actors with limited information and limited understanding.
So the goal is to make the best decision that you can with the information that you have and with proper exercise of reasonable foresight for potential consequences.
Because none of us are perfect.
Right.
I will say this is a major political ethical theory, at least in the US.
If you're looking at a lot of the.
It's it's.
It gets harder to maintain this outlook sometimes, but if you're looking at a lot of the discourse, what it boils down to is a fundamental disagreement over what constitutes benefit and what constitutes harm.
Now always like using this example, but how many of you consider taxes a harm?
Some brave soul is going to raise their hand.
Yeah.
She, Sean takes the more balanced, you know, depends on what they are used for, and that's usually the follow up question, right.
It's like, OK, so you you say taxes are harm, but are public fire departments are harm, you know?
Is the Interstate Highway system of harm, you know, and you'll get some people, usually ******** libertarians, who are like, yeah, it's all terrible.
Don't do it, and that's fine.
That's a that is a.
That is a position, but most people when you start drilling into it are gonna be like, well, no.
OK, public education is a benefit, you know, but you're really what you're really getting into is what's you're not wrong, Jacob.
But I would argue that it's not really, it doesn't.
That's a different issue.
Alex is correct, the necessary to maintain infrastructure, but they can be abused.
But you're fine.
That's that's.
That's just the real world, right?
I mean, end of the day, that's that's true about almost everything.
But you still use it as a guiding principle, right?
You want to taxes are a harm.
OK, I'm gonna just come out, and I'm gonna say taxes are a harm, but they could be.
When used properly, the minimum harm necessary to maximize benefit, for example public education, is a benefit to a society.
You know, having a, having a populace that is educated to a certain fundamental level, which in the US we have decided as a high school education is a benefit to the society at a large and it's very often actually a benefit to every individual that interacts within that society.
But how do you get public education without taxes, right?
So taxes are a harm, but they are harmed.
That is supposed to be minimized.
While you maximize the benefit that comes from them unless necessary evil, right?
Except for we don't like to use the term evil in here, Jay cause.
But that's metaethics.
Umm.
Sean, a lot of people will, will, you know, especially like nuclear weapons.
It's hard to justify those, even under consequentialist form of ethics, but you can right mutually assured destruction, at least for the first you know, for the last 50 years of the 20th century worked right?
We didn't have a nuclear war.
Exactly 2 nuclear weapons have ever been dropped as an act of war.
So you can actually make an argument that mutually assured destruction was a successful use of consequentialist ethics.
I'm not making that.
I'm not a I'm not a modern historian.
That's not my area of expertise, but I'm saying you can make that argument, and that's both the strength and the weakness of consequentialist ethics.
Umm it it again?
We're not perfect.
You look at it in hindsight, the hindsight analysis doesn't help you when you have to make a decision, right?
Any ethical theory that only works in hindsight is kind of pointless from a practical standpoint.
Maybe as useful from a meta and that now metaethical analysis, but it's not useful to people just trying to live a good life.
So you have to be looking forward. Umm.
So yeah, major political theory.
But there's a lot of issues with it.
Fundamental issue is how do you define benefit?
How do you define harm?
How do you balance, you know, if something deals 100 units of benefit but deals 10 units of harm?
Is that better than something that deals 50 units of benefit, but only 5 units of harm?
Or are they equivalent?
Mathematically, they're equivalent, but are they actually equivalent?
Those are the sorts of things that get Dr Consequentialist at.
Is mad, but that's why they do it.
Umm, the other thing about consequentialist ethics is it does get some Flack for being basically ethical mathematics.
And of course, that's not really the case.
You can't quantify these sorts of things to that level of detail.
Umm, but you can see why that that gets that particular criticism.
Criticism gets made from time to time.
Alright, moving on.
And then applied ethics like I mentioned earlier, we're going to use the ACM Code of Ethics.
We're using it specifically because the ACM Code of Ethics kind of wraps together all three of these, and I really like that.
One of the things I want you to take away from this class is basically nobody uses a single system of ethics in their day-to-day life.
Most everybody is using some mishmash amalgamation.
Uh, half a dozen different systems of ethics.
You know, maybe one of the guiding guiding principles of your life is what would Aragorn do?
In which case good on you, it's hard to find a better, better example.
Umm.
Maybe what would Sam do right?
Umm, but you've got most people you know they're using some combination of virtue ethics, deontological ethics, consequentialist ethics, and they're using it.
And they're doing all of this analysis completely subconsciously.
OK, that's cool.
That's how most people work.
I would like for you all to look at that to examine that, to look at how you make ethical decisions and try to explicate, you know, where does this come from?
Where does this come from?
Why is this?
One of the things I think about when I have to decide how to act, I use Lord of the Rings because I was practically raised on Lord of the Rings.
Right.
Like I read that book so many times.
Absolutely loved it.
The movies charge of the Rohirrim every time tears.
You know, for me, that was foundational, right?
Same with like the tales of King Arthur and Robin Hood, like I was raised on classical I classical, but on medieval, you know, mythology and fantasy basically.
And that's had a profound impact on me.
Likewise, my ******** evangelical Christian upbringing has had a deep impact on me, as have my later studies in Buddhist and Daoist Buddhism and Daoism.
You know all of these things have had an impact.
My military upbringing has had an impact on me.
You know, the fact that I've worked for nonprofits mostly in the medical field for my entire career has had an impact on me.
All of these things have had an impact on me and have helped inform how I try to make ethical decisions.
Even when I fail and that's one of the things that is really makes the study of ethics worth it, is looking at, you know, really digging into why you make the decisions you make both both when you fail but also when you succeed.
Like, hey, I made a really good decision.
Why?
What made me make that decision and you know, to pull a phrase from Socrates, the unexamined life is not worth living, right?
Examine your life.
Figure things out? Umm.
One of the other reasons why I like looking at this is you will run into a time in your in your lives where there will be a conflict between your personal ethics, your professional ethics, and your societal ethics.
Umm, it happens to everybody.
Could be minor, could be a very little thing, right?
But you are going to run into a situation where there is a conflict, you know, could be you have to fire somebody that you really don't think should be fired.
But the bottom line demands that you let people go.
OK, I'm a manager.
That's something that I have to deal with.
Umm, you know, how do you handle that?
What do you do when personal ethics and professional ethics aren't necessarily in line with each other?
Umm.
And in order to avoid some really painful cognitive dissonance, it really helps to try and examine this before it happens to you.
Umm, so the last bit before we just open it up for questions and discussions is your reading assignment.
As I say in the slide, I don't actually expect you all to read those other than the person who already read neck McCain ethics.
Good on you, but I do have some links in the slides which I will post as soon as I get access to Blackboard.
Uh.
I I do have some some references there to the works that we will be more or less discussing, but mostly I give those to you so that you all can engage in some Wikipedia Foo.
You know, there's a lot of value, especially if if this is just like a a side thing for you and not your career, there's a lot of value to just looking up ethics on Wikipedia and getting caught in an ethical loop in the Wikipedia loop.
What I do want you to read though is on this page I've got in in front of you.
I've got 3 links to really good sources.
The first one is the Internet and cyclopedia of philosophy.
Umm.
And this is a very accessible investigation, a very accessible write up about philosophy.
It's out of a Tennessee University, University of Tennessee at Memphis.
Really accessible?
Umm, not that deep, but that's OK because it gives you a lot of stuff in it in a way that I found like really useful to people that aren't like again, making their academic career the study of ethics.
I also linked to you, the Stanford and Cyclopedia philosophy, which is the exact opposite of the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy at the University of Tennessee, Memphis.
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy isn't as well laid out, but if you if you spend some time with it, there's a lot of really good stuff there and it's definitely worth at least doing some quick searches, maybe look up Aristotle, cont and Mills.
You know JS mills.
I do want you to spend some time on those before our ethical class so that you can at least be familiar with the systems we're going to talk about.
And again, erisos, Nick and McCain ethics cons Deonte categorical imperatives.
John Stuart Mills formulation of utilitarianism.
The one that I really want you to read though is the ACM Code of Ethics and the case scenarios we cover that in the second class of the ethics block and those ones I want you to read all of the code of ethics isn't that long.
It's only four sections and the 4th section is like 2 paragraphs, but that is the ACM Code of Ethics and it's pretty.
It's not widely adopted.
We'll talk about the lack of an option of a code of ethics and the computer engineering profession.
UM, but it's fairly widely adopted.
It's well written and the case studies that they have are well, if you look at them, it'll basically tell you how to answer a large part of the ethics test.
So please do so.
But they're really good, you know, just little studies about applying the ACM Code of Ethics to the computer engineering profession.
And some of them are situations that I've actually seen in real life, so I highly recommend it, and that is that so questions, comments, thoughts, leomon, me folks.
And if you don't have any, not a problem.
I do want to mention I will get that I will get the discussion prompt posted as soon as I get access to this semester's blackboard again.
Things have gone funky, but you know such as life.
Any challenges or here we go.
Sean, how do you feel about mastering others of strength?
Mastering yourself. Those who speak.
I I recognize that quote so that that's a pretty excellent formulation and of a part of Daoist ethics.
I will say the Dao de Ching is really difficult to get into.
The Cheng Su and the etching I think are better, especially the etching is a better way to dive into Daoist ethics, but the whole goal of Dawes ethics is self mastery.
Joseph, there is no due date.
Just finish it before the end of the semester.
And the the other thing that that was that's really has is an emphasis on the development of wisdom and the idea that you, when you're wise, you do the wise man makes things happen without making things without doing things.
They guide people to do things.
So you don't have to speak really.
You know, you just it it get the whole the whole concept of Wuwei action within action is really difficult, but it's kind of cool.
Andy, that is an excellent summation that that is this class summed up in four points.
But yeah.
So Richard, I'm when I say that you're Richard asking when I say people use many ethical lenses, you know, I'm talking about major ethical frameworks or, for instance, personal, professional, legal.
And the answer to that is all of them.
Most people, I really do think that most people, when they make decisions, they use a combination of all of the ethics that they picked up right?
A devout Christian is going to make should be making ethical decisions based on the ethics found in the New Testament, you know, but they're also going to do so in light of the ethics that they've picked up and learned about their profession.
You know about individual things that they've learned in the course of their personal lives.
You know it's going to color how they apply this to everything, and most people will act at least with an eye towards what's legal, cause most people don't want to go to jail.
So you know and and that applies to everything like when you all when you all make a decision about whether or not to come to class, which is really low level decision, right, there's not necessarily a whole lot of ethical implications in that, but every decision is an ethical decision.
OK, when you all make that decision about whether or not you're gonna come to class, you're making that decision based on a huge variety of ethical principles that you maybe aren't even thinking about.
You know, maybe you decide to come to class because you want to be the sort of student that goes to class.
Maybe you decide to come to class because you're worried that if you don't come to class, you're gonna get marked off on participation points.
Maybe you don't go to class because you've got half a dozen much more serious projects and having an hour and a half back into your life is going to help you finish those up, which is going to do better for your grade, which is a personal consequentialist view, right?
Most people make those sorts of decisions with a like I said, a web of unexamined ethical ideas.
Uh.
Alex asked with professional ethical codes.
Is it up to some counsel to decide?
Yeah, usually.
You know, usually it's some governing body.
Oftentimes that has been established by tradition or by some sort of the election process, or sometimes just a bunch of people that get together and are like, hey, we think this and other people buy into it and they had then have the authority to do that.
So yeah, that what you say at the end, you know it's brought up in just accepted by society as a whole.
Is kind of accurate.
That's the.
That's the social contract really, which would be a topic unto itself.
That's a good question.
Nicholas, that's a good question.
Do I have any thoughts on Stoicism versus Epicureanism?
Epicureanism gets a bad rap.
I actually think Stoicism and Epicureanism are two sides of the same coin.
I prefer stoicism.
Umm, but that's mostly because Marcus Aurelius's meditations is basically a if I have any Brandon Sanderson fans in here, it's basically a real life way of kings.
It is a dude who is doing his best to live an ethical life.
Writing journaling his thoughts about how to do so, and it's super accessible.
The other thing is Stoicism kind of has a really strong emphasis on tenacity, which is also shared by Daoism, by the way, perseverance would be more the Daoist terminology.
And honestly, you know, grit matters.
Umm, so I tend to prefer Stoicism, but I actually think Stoicism and Epicureanism arrive at the same point through different pathways by Jay Phillip, my peeps.
OK, I can see that Nicholas.
I can definitely see that.
How do I feel about existentialism?
Man, so I actually read a decent amount of existentialism in college and it just it never really clicked with me.
A lot of the postmodern philosophies just don't click with me.
But that's not because I think they're wrong as much as it's just like I mentioned earlier, I was raised really old school in this regard.
Umm, I think there's a lot of value in the idea that existence has the meaning that we give it.
Umm.
And I think, especially if you're trying to have a more humanist approach to ethics, that's almost required.
You you almost have to accept that the only meaning to existence is the meaning that we give it, and that's what allows you to then create ethical rules for yourself to follow.
Where?
But the issue with the issue with the with existentialism and knee chain particular is the tendency towards solipsism and solipsism.
Is, I think, a A, a it it it's it's a fault.
It's not a, it's not.
It's not.
It's it's not a feature, it's a bug.
Umm, I don't think the same thing about nihilism necessarily, but I do think that about solipsism.
Umm, ethics is the trolley problem?
No, clay ethics is not the trolley problem.
I don't like the trolley problem because it's a little too far removed from.
From real life to actually teach people anything, I think if you're really interested in the trolley problem, you do a better job studying Buddhism and then looking up some Zen coins.
I think there are variations of the trolley problem that can be useful, but the trolley problem in and of itself is it.
I get why it's there.
I get it's a teaching tool.
It's just not one I like Austin asked about absurdism.
In our modern society, some days it feels like that's the only real response to what our modern society is.
But again, most of my study and ethics is old, not new.
Most of my study in philosophy is old, not new.
How often are the reading assignments going to come up in class compared to just the discussion board?
So for the ethics portion, we will talk about uh aristotles Megan McCain.
Ethics constitute categorical imperatives and mills.
Utilitarianism on the 1st Ethics Day and we'll talk about the ACM Code of Ethics and the cases on the second Ethics day, and then they'll never pop up again.
Umm, but the discussion board will deal with them for the copyright section when I give you the reasons on them, the class is taught on the reading assignments.
Some of the worst hypothetical decisions that can't mill, etcetera would make face on their ideas.
Nicholas, I have never had anyone.
I've never had anyone ask me that question before.
That's one I'd have to think about?
Richard asked.
Can you step back and explain the difference between Nehalem and solipsism?
Nihilism is the belief that nothing really matters, and solipsism is the belief that only you matter.
One of those is both of those I think are flawed, but nihilism isn't fundamentally flawed, because if nothing really matters, then everything has the has the value that is given to it.
It doesn't have intrinsic value, so lips ISM is the idea that only you matter and that leads to like the worst case is the main character syndrome you will ever see.
That's when you get people who start.
I mean that that's when things get bad.
Ascribed value based on circumstance.
Yeah, there's some accuracy to that.
I think you can have a valid ethical theory with things not having intrinsic value which is at its core what nihilism is.
I don't think you can have a valid ethical theory when you're fundamental proposition is the only thing that has intrinsic value is yourself.
And y'all asking good questions to day.
Now again, Richard, that's my thoughts on the matter.
You know, if you asked if you ask five different philosophers to same question, you'd probably get like 13 different answers. Sean.
Yeah, that's that's my thought on it.
But again, you know my fundamental ethical theory is, though ISM and Stoicism is actually very externally focused.
Buddhism and Stoicism are like the two things that I try to live by, you know, and there's a reason I like ethics of care.
The world sucks.
Don't make things worse for people, right?
I don't actually think the world sucks.
I just think it's hard.
Life is hard.
Don't make things bad for other people you know.
Yeah, Joey, that's basically it.
Umm can you apply it on a broad range without causing large problems?
Large amounts of harm if you can't universally apply something without causing like large amounts of harm, it's probably not a valid ethical theory.
You know umm.
And again, you still have to answer what constitutes harm.
You can dive down that whole.
You know that rabbit hole for ages, but fundamental end of the day if you can't apply your theory without, you know, just mucking up everybody's lives, it's not a valid ethical theory.
As long as it's a peaceful anarchy, you're not wrong, Robert.
If it was a peaceful anarchy, that might be ideal.
OK, Richard, the highest common good is the best pursuit for any given individual.
That's kind of like the Objectivist.
The Anne Rand viewpoint and the problem with that is in general it never works that way.
OK.
If you act entirely self-centered, pursuing only your best common good, you're not acting with regard to the impact on other people.
And again, we live in a society fundamental principle of Buddhism is everything is connected.
You know the intricate web of interdependence.
You know the actions that you take effect others.
Both both other individuals, but also just the world around you.
OK.
And that's part of why study of ethics is so important.
Because you wanna take good actions.
So you can make your lives and everybody's lives a little bit better, so anything that goes against that in my mind is pretty invalid.
This is the way.
Yes, Nicholas Cont would not lie even if it saves 1,000,000 lives because absolute honesty was one of his categorical imperatives.
Mill probably would enslave one person to make everyone have good lives.
Mill probably would come down on.
You could kill a dude if doing so would save enough other people.
I think if you really pushed him on that he would do so.
UM and Nicholas I also agree with you.
I do think virtue ethics is the most resilient to those extreme hypotheticals.
It just has its own problems as well.
Yes, Ben, there's a lot you can learn from verbal virtue ethics from comic books.
Ohh Richard.
OK, I see what you mean.
I I thought you were saying the opposite of it, that the pursuit of what's best for you is what's best for everybody.
Now you gotta be careful with what you're saying, Richard.
Because, umm, you know, you you run into the giving tree problem right where you give and give and give and give and you don't.
You know, you gotta take care of yourself too.
One of the fundamental principles of ethics of care is you have to take care of yourself in order to take care of others.
But I do think that acting with an eye towards the greater good is a fundamentally ethic ethical at ethical viewpoint.
But again, these are my thoughts on the matter.
You know, you go, makes you go do your own reading, and you're gonna find a whole bunch of people that have entirely different thoughts on the matter.
Alright so.
I'm going to stop the recording.
Ohh, I can't stop the recording.
Robert, do you mind stopping the recording?
Thank you for starting that up by the way.
I really appreciate it.
